to the American consulate, you know, the
Hungarian, actually the American consulate in
Vienna who was taking care of the Hungarian
refugees and then We got our visas, we got our
papers. They interrogated my father and asked him
if he's a communist or not, or if he ever was a
communist, which he was a communist because he had
two children. If he wasn't a communist, he wasn't
communist at heart, you know, but he had to say he
was, otherwise he would never get the kind of
treatment that we got, you know. But anyhow, he
convinced the people over there that he wasn't a
communist and everything. So we got sent to
Salzburg from there on a train. And then from
Salzburg, we took an electric train all the way
across Austria through Germany to Bremenhaven.
Bremen Harbor, it's a big port next to Hamburg, a
big seaport, you know. And on the 19th of January,
we took aboard on a military ship. About 2,000 of us
were put on that ship, and then we came, sailed
across the United States. And it took us 11 days, 11
days to get over here. What were the feelings on the
ship? On the ship, it was wonderful. Everybody got
seasick, though, but, you know, the feeling of the
freedom and, you know, When you get to the New York
Harbor and then you sailed across the Statue of
Liberty, I mean, you know, my mother was crying and
then it was really, really cold. And I remember the
ship was coming in, you know, and then we see this
faint light and then we got closer and you saw it was
the Statue of Liberty, you know. It was, the
feeling was, you know, just like a rebirth, you
know, a renaissance of a new life, you know. My
father and my mother was planning. And there's a
lot of uncertainties also because you didn't know
what you were getting into, you know, and you had
two young children, you know, that needed taking
care of and everything. So, but they had a lot of
ambition, you know, and they were healthy and they
knew they could make it in a new world. And once we
got to the harbor, we were here for two days. They
wouldn't let us out of the boat until we went
through another total... examination, medical
examination, you know. And then we were sent to a
military post. We went to Camp Kilmer in New
Jersey. They took us on. Everybody was put on big
buses, about 15, 20 buses, and we all went over
there. And we got a new set of clothing over there.
We were there for about a week, you know. and a new
set of clothing from top to bottom, you know, just
everything. And a religious group from Salem, New
Jersey had approached the camp and they were
looking for three Hungarian families that they
promised work and housing for. And we happened to
be one of the three families and we settled in
Phelan, New Jersey in the beginning. This was from
February of 1957 until August of 69, you know, is
when we moved from New Jersey to Texas, you know,
but during those years, you know, I went through
high school. I married a Hungarian woman whom I met
in a Hungarian church, you know, and in that part of
the United States, like in New Jersey, there's a
lot of ethnic groups. Everybody was coming across
the Atlantic Ocean from Europe. There were a lot of
lot of German people, a lot of Hungarian people, a
lot of Russians, you know, a lot of Polish people,
and they were all had their own little towns in New
York City, you know, and we lived only about 10-15
miles from the New York City, and we all went to take
get picnics over there. They had Hungarian
schools, Hungarian churches, so we fit in pretty
easy over there and the transition was a little bit
easier going through this way. In the beginning
when you first came to the United States did you
still hear keep up of course you did but did you hear
all what was going on in Hungary still yes we we did
in the beginning we exchanged a lot of letters but
the letters got censored and we got the word from
our relatives that we should not write or we should
break contacts because they made the lives of our
loved ones over there a lot harder because because
of our association their association with us so
slowly but surely you know we stopped writing
letters and uh it was uh it was a sad situation but
they they heard us anywhere they could you know so
this was one of the ways they did The early ways of
fitting into the new society and the new life was
kind of hard. It wasn't really hard for me. It was
harder for my mother and my father, you know. I
picked up the language real fast. I remember I went
to the first grade and In that spring of 57, I
started the first grade for a couple of weeks. I
learned how to read and write. I remember
correcting the math papers for the little kids.
And then I went from the first, second, third,
fourth, fifth, all the way through until sixth or
seventh by the end of June. I was a beginning 10th
grader when I left Hungary, and I picked up 10th
grade all over again so I really I lost one year
along the way but I had a lot of credit they gave me a
lot of credit for for foreign language I I had six
years of Russian behind me when I was a 10th grader I
started Russian they made a start real early you
know they didn't they didn't learn too much but
they learned taught us a lot of songs in Russian and
learn we learn how to how to count and things like
that just just words you know we had to do so it my
father started as a painter you know they gave
first they they put him into a a machine shop and he
couldn't cope with the the change over from
decimal system to the to the inches was very very
hard for him he could not he could he couldn't
transfer the system over you know so this this
Dutch painter this guy came from Holland and he was
started to he asked my father if he would go and help
him paint you know so I remember my father got a
dollar and a quarter for an hour to paint with him,
and then he became a painter from that point on. He
got real good at it, and thus the Nagy and Son, we had
a Nagy and Son painting and decorating over there.
I was still young. I only helped him on the weekends
because I was still in school, but I used to go with
him and give estimates. you know, on jobs, and I was
driving the truck. I already got my license when I
was, I turned 16. at June 5th 1957 and I got a license
and I helped my father get a license also you know
and so he was able to drive fairly soon and
re-established our painting business and it
flourished and it was pretty good and I got married
in 1964 and in 1969 we left New Jersey because we
felt that to raise a family, the state was very
crowded and the place where we lived was a very
crowded city. There was, you know, just, you know,
Was the United States like you had, did it turn out
to be like you had expected, or from what you had
heard? Well, it turned out much, much more than
what I expected. I have never, I didn't expect
anything, what I've got, what I've, you know, I...
I didn't expect paved roads and tall skyscrapers
and the quality of life and all that was just a shock
to us. The department stores and the supermarkets
just blew my mind because over there you had to
stand in line for five pounds of frozen potato, you
know, and then They measured out the flour into a
little paper sack that you had to take with you
because the grocer didn't have the paper sacks to
put the stuff in, you know. And they had these
little carrying bags and then they would dump the
tomatoes or the potatoes or the rice or what have
you right in your bag, you know. And over here you go
in there and everything is pre-packed and nobody,
you just take it from the shelf and go through to the
cashier and pay for it and be gone, you know. And
that was just very, you know, the abundance of
articles and the clothing, the shoes. My father
had to work an hour for one egg. You had to work for a
whole week for a pair of shoes, you know. I mean,
this is the type, I mean, I had to, I worked a whole
summer long, you know, in between school, summer
vacations, I used to go work for the railroad,
empty car, empty, unload railroad cars, coals and
sand, and sometimes the residue from the factory,
you know, when they, when they, When the coal
burns, there's a lot of ashes and they put these
ashes on the cars and then they carry them out in the
suburbs of the cities and then you dump them over
there and they spread it out over there between the
railroad tracks and stuff. I did that all summer
long. And I was able to buy a suit of clothing, you
know, a pair of pants and a shirt and a pair of shoes,
you know. But these little things helped a great
deal because my parents weren't able to, you know,
afford too much, you know, just the bare
necessities and all these things over here. When I
first came to this country, I got a dictionary, and
I said, I'm going to go get a job. And I was 17 years
old. And I went up and down the street with a
dictionary in my hand. And I went into every store.
I was 16 years old. I didn't even speak any English.
And I got hired in a Hebrew national. There's a lot
of Jewish people on the East Coast. And I was
working in a delicatessen as a kitchen boy. I
wasn't allowed to go into the store. I was in the
back over there cleaning out the shelves and
sweeping up and just general tidying. And I got
$0.70 an hour. for doing that, and I thought that
was just great, you know. I made more money in one
week than my father done in a month. Yeah, it was
great. So, yeah, that was my first one. And then I
also was a paper boy, and later on when I advanced a
little bit in my speech, I worked for
a furniture store as a delivery boy, you know, and,
you know, I went through hard times. After high
school, I attended the University of Fairleigh
Dickinson for a couple of years. I attended some
courses in Rutgers for a semester and a half, and I
never finished college altogether. was going to
finish it. I finished a trade school called RETS.
It's a radio, electronic, and tech television
school, you know. So I'm a full-fledged,
you might call it a mechanical engineer, sort of,
you know. But never finished college. And when I
was... I got married in 1964, and we lived four more
years, and then we decided to come to Texas in 1969.
And ever since, you know, I used to live on Hillview
Drive for 17 or 18 years, and then we sold that house
over here. I'm just kind of continuing what I
started. You know, I was a painter, I'm still a
painter, but I do some remodeling now. And I have
four children, and we're making it. Quite well.
Looking back on it, what do you feel are some of the
most significant outcomes of the Revolution of
1946? Well, the most significant outcome of the
Revolution, in my mind, was that... We tried it for
a while and it worked for two weeks, you see. And
that put a very big
dream in a people's mind, you know. And as we can see
it, that, you know, ever since then there were
really little revolutions throughout the areas,
you know. Czechoslovakia had another one in the
early 60s and Poland never really gotten really
settled Poland was always one that was always
dissatisfied and finally I think the whole
disillusionment and everything just came to a
such an abrupt end in this last year, you know, that
communism just totally got wiped out. I really
like to go back and visit. Up to now, I was not able to
go back because I'm wearing my father's name, you
know, I'm junior, and he was really sought after
after the revolution. And later on, in the early
days, my relatives wrote that my father would have
gotten deported to Siberia had he come back.
Excuse me. I don't know. Amnesty rules didn't make
any difference over there. But I'd like to go back
now and visit where I grew up and where I went to
school. see if I can locate some of my relatives
most of my father's brothers and sisters he had
three brothers and a sister they're all died you
know so did my father he died 1974 you know over here
in Texas but I think it wasn't in vain I don't think
it was in vain because you know it it it Everybody
finally got freedom because of some of the
peoples, you know. So what were your feelings when
you saw the wall come down? Oh, boy, I would have
loved to be there, you know, because we didn't
climb that wall because we didn't come through
there. But the wall to me was coming across the Iron
Curtain, you know, and it was up there. And it was
down for two weeks, but after that it was up, you
know. And I was really thrilled when all these
things were happening, you know. I said, my God, if
my father would have... would be alive now. It was
just great. I really am thankful for this country.
I would go to war for this country, you know, and I
would, you know, raise arms and I would defend this
country because I think, you know, there's a lot of
good, you know, is here, you know. Freedom is what
people want, you know, and it's a very big thing to
be cherished. Well thank you very much for this
interview, Mr. Nagy. You're welcome.